Copyright © by Lincoln Paine, The Sea and Civilization: A Maritime History of 
the World (New York: Knopf, 2013; ISBN 978-1-4000-4409-2 (hardback); London: Atlantic Books, 2014; ISBN 978-1782393559 (hardback)). Available as an ebook. To be published in Chinese, Korean, Romanian, and Russian translation.
Introduction 
I want to change the way you see the world. Specifically, I want to change the 
way you see the world map by focusing your attention on the blues that shade 
70 percent of the image before you, and letting the earth tones fade. This shift 
in emphasis from land to water makes many trends and patterns of world history stand out in ways they simply cannot otherwise. Before the development of 
the marine steam engine in the nineteenth century, culture, commerce, contagion, and conflict generally moved faster by sea than by land. The opening of 
sea routes sometimes resulted in immediate transformation, but more often it 
laid the groundwork for what was later mistaken for sudden change. The best 
example of this is the trade networks of the Indian Ocean, the oldest of which 
were pioneered at least four thousand years ago by navigators sailing between 
Mesopotamia and the mouths of the Indus River. By the start of the common 
era two thousand years ago, the Indian subcontinent was a point of departure 
and destination for merchants and mendicants from across the Arabian Sea 
and the Bay of Bengal. This is all but unnoticed in the written record, which 
boasts of no figure comparable to a Gilgamesh or Odysseus, and despite a
growing body of archaeological evidence, these undertakings remain largely 
unrecognized. As a result, the later arrival in Southeast Asia of Muslim traders from the Indian subcontinent and Southwest Asia, of Chinese merchants 
of various faiths, and of Portuguese Christians seem like so many historical 
surprises. Only the last were absolute newcomers to the Monsoon Seas that 
stretch from the shores of East Africa to the coasts of Korea and Japan. The 
others were heirs to ancient, interlinked traditions of seafaring and trade that 
long ago connected the shores of East Africa with those of Northeast Asia. 
This book shows many similar examples of maritime regions that were quietly
 
4 T H E S E A A N D C I V I L I Z AT I O N
exploited before events conspired to thrust them into the historical limelight. 
Two questions merit consideration before taking on a maritime history of the 
world as either writer or reader: What is maritime history? and What is world 
history? The answers to both have as much to do with perspective as with subject matter. World history involves the synthetic investigation of complex interactions between people of distinct backgrounds and orientations. It therefore 
transcends historians’ more traditional focus on politically, religiously, or culturally distinct communities seen primarily in their own terms at a local, national, or regional level. As a subject of interdisciplinary and interregional inquiry, maritime history is a branch of world history that covers obvious topics 
like shipbuilding, maritime trade, oceanic exploration, human migration, and 
naval history. Considered as a perspective, however, the premise of maritime 
history is that the study of events that take place on or in relation to the water 
offers unique insights into human affairs. The maritime historian therefore 
draws on such disciplines as the arts, religion, language, the law, and political 
economy.
An alternative and perhaps simpler way to approach the question, What is 
maritime history? is to tackle its unasked twin: What is terrestrial history?—
the view from the land being our default perspective. Imagine a world of people bound to the land. The ancient Greek diaspora would have taken a different 
character and been forced in different directions without ships to carry Euboeans, Milesians, and Athenians to new markets and to sustain contacts between 
colonies and homelands. Without maritime commerce, neither Indians nor 
Chinese would have exerted the substantial influence they did in Southeast 
Asia, and that region would have been spared the cultural sobriquets of IndoChina and Indonesia (literally, “Indian islands”)—in fact, the latter would have 
remained unpeopled altogether. The Vikings of medieval Scandinavia could 
never have spread as quickly or widely as they did and thereby altered the political landscape of medieval Europe. And without mariners, the history of the 
past five centuries would have to be reimagined in its entirety. The age of 
western European expansion was a result of maritime enterprise without which 
Europe might well have remained a marginalized corner of the Eurasian landmass with its back to what Latinate Europe called Mare Tenebrosum and Arabic speakers Bahr al-Zulamat, “the sea of darkness.” The Mughals, Chinese, 
and Ottomans would have overshadowed the divisive and sectarian polities of 
Europe, which would have been unable to settle or conquer the Americas, to 
develop the transatlantic slave trade, or to have gained an imperial foothold in 
Asia.
The past century has witnessed a sea change in how we approach maritime 
history. Formerly a preserve of antiquarian interest whose practitioners lav- 
 
Introduction 5 
ished their efforts on “ancient ships and boats, ship models, images, ethnography, lexicographical and bibliographical matters and flags,” maritime history 
once focused chiefly on preserving and interpreting material that was readily 
available. This directed historians’ attention to European, Mediterranean, and 
modern North American maritime and naval history. Maritime accomplishment was almost always viewed as a peculiarly European phenomenon that 
only attained real importance with Columbus’s epochal voyage to the Americas in 1492. In this telling, the story proceeded directly and exclusively to an 
explanation of how Europeans used their superior maritime and naval technology to impose themselves upon the rest of the world. 
Taking Europe’s “classic age of sail” from the sixteenth to eighteenth centuries as a model for the rest of maritime history is seductive but inadvisable. 
While the global change wrought by mariners and the dynamics of maritime 
Europe are of unquestionable importance to a proper understanding of the 
world since 1500, maritime achievement is more broadly spread and its effects 
more complicated than such a narrative suggests. European supremacy was far 
from inevitable. More important, the concentration on Europe’s past five centuries has distorted our interpretation of the maritime record of other periods 
and places and our appreciation of its relevance to human progress. No parallels exist for the almost symbiotic relationship between commercial and naval 
policy—what we might call a “naval-commercial complex”—characteristic of 
Europe’s maritime expansion. There is nothing like it in classical antiquity, in 
Asia, or in Europe before the Renaissance, and by the twenty-first century the 
close ties between national naval strategy and maritime commerce so prevalent 
in this age had all but vanished. The period of western Europe’s maritime 
dominance was critical, but it is a misleading standard against which to measure other eras.
This Eurocentric worldview was reinforced by the widespread belief 
among western historians that race was a sufficient explanation for “the inequality of various extant human societies.” In the nineteenth and early twentieth centuries, the clearest material manifestation of racial superiority writ large 
was maritime power and Europeans’ ability to extend their hegemony overseas 
to create and sustain colonial empires half a world away. This gave rise to the 
ahistorical generalization that there are maritime people like the Greeks and 
British and nonmaritime people like the Romans and Chinese. Such assumptions mask complex realities. Put another way, the extent to which different 
nations rely on cars or planes depends on economics, industrialization, geography, and other considerations, and no one would think of ascribing car or plane 
use to racial or ethnic tendencies. In reaction to this assumption of an innate 
European and North American superiority at sea, a number of writers
 
6 T H E S E A A N D C I V I L I Z AT I O N
attempted to redress the balance by writing explicitly ethnocentric or nationalist maritime histories about non-Europeans. While these valuable correctives
exposed previously untapped indigenous writings and other evidence of seafaring by people otherwise considered to have had little or no maritime heritage, 
they tended to create their own versions of maritime exceptionalism.
Even as this tendency was running its course, Fernand Braudel’s magisterial The Mediterranean and the Mediterranean World in the Age of Philip II
(1949) ushered in a new approach to maritime history. Inspired by his brilliant
analysis of the interplay between geography, economics, politics, military, and
cultural history, maritime historians looking past nationalist paradigms have
embraced the validity of treating seas and ocean basins as coherent units of
study and the past half century has seen a surfeit of works examining individual oceans and seas. This is an enlightening exercise that enables us to consider
cross-cultural and transnational connections without constant reference to the 
mutable fiction of political borders. At the same time, we run the risk of replacing a set of arbitrary terrestrial boundaries with an equally arbitrary division of the world ocean. There is little agreement about how to parcel the waters of the world into discrete, named bodies of bays, gulfs, straits, channels,
seas, and oceans, and in practice sailors rarely recognize such distinctions
drafted from afar. An ancient Greek epigram acknowledges the unity of the
world ocean with stark simplicity:
All sea is sea. . . .
Pray if you like for a good voyage home,
But Aristagoras, buried here, has found
The ocean has the manners of an ocean.
This book is an attempt to examine how people came into contact with one
another by sea and river, and so spread their crops, their manufactures, and
their social systems—from language to economics to religion—from one place
to another. While I have not ignored the climactic moments of maritime history, I have attempted to put them in a broader context to show how shifting approaches to maritime systems can be read as indicators of broader change beyond the sea. I have concentrated on a few themes: how maritime enterprise
enlarges trading realms that share certain kinds of knowledge—of markets and
commercial practice, or navigation and shipbuilding; how the overseas spread
of language, religion, and law facilitates interregional connections; and how
rulers and governments exploit maritime enterprise through taxation, trade protection, and other mechanisms to consolidate and augment their power.
I have sketched this history as a narrative to show region by region the deliberate process by which maritime regions of the world were knit together.
 
Introduction 7 
But this is not a story of saltwater alone. Maritime activity includes not only
high seas and coastal voyaging, but also inland navigation.* Islanders may 
have obvious reasons to put to sea, but the exploitation of freshwater rivers,
lakes, and canals has been critical to the growth of countries with large continental territories. The center of North America became economically productive thanks to its accessibility via the St. Lawrence and Welland Rivers and the
Great Lakes, and by the Mississippi River and its tributaries. Neither corridor
could have reached its potential without the development of maritime technologies—steam power in the case of the Mississippi, and locks and dams in the 
case of the Great Lakes.
If the geography of water, wind, and land shapes the maritime world in
obvious ways, maritime endeavor becomes a determining force in history only
when the right combination of economic, demographic, and technological
conditions is met. Few fifteenth-century observers could have imagined the
prosperity that would accrue to Spain and Portugal as a result of their navigators’ peregrinations in the eastern Atlantic. While they sailed in search of a 
route to the spices of Asia, they also came upon the Americas, a source of untold wealth in the form of silver and gold; of raw materials for European markets and new markets for European manufacturers; and territory—“virgin” in 
Europeans’ eyes—for the cultivation of recently discovered or transplanted
crops like tobacco and sugar. Papal intervention in disputes over which lands
would be Portuguese and which Spanish resulted in a series of bulls and treaties that partitioned the navigation of the non-Christian Atlantic and Indian
Oceans between Portugal and Spain, and helps explain why the majority of
people in South and Central America are Spanish- or Portuguese-speaking
Catholics.
A maritime perspective complicates our understanding of the “westward”
expansion of the United States. California achieved statehood in 1851, two
years after the discovery of gold at Sutter’s Mill, when the territory was virtually unknown to Americans back east and the number of United States citizens
on the Pacific coast numbered only a few thousand. Thanks to the extraordinary capacity of the American merchant marine of the day, tens of thousands
of people reached San Francisco by ship, a mode of transportation that was
faster, cheaper, and safer than the transcontinental journey, although the distance covered was more than four times longer. The United States conquered
* Some may question whether the use of “maritime,” from the Latin word for “sea,” is appropriate
to freshwater shipping. It is worth noting that the Association for Great Lakes Maritime History 
has seventy-five institutional members in the United States and Canada. The names of ten include 
“maritime,” another thirteen use “marine,” and Suttons Bay, Michigan, is home to the Inland Seas 
Education Association.