There is a long history of integrating cognitive and behavioral perspectives into the study of environmental risk, beginning with geographer Gilbert F. White’s work on floodplain management in the 1940s. White famously declared in his 1945 dissertation that: “floods are acts of god, but flood losses are largely acts of man,” making the point that it is the interaction between human perceptions and behaviors and natural hazards that explains the loss of life and property associated with extreme events (White 1945: 2). The fields of environmental psychology, sociology, geography, natural hazards, cultural studies, and media and communications have produced bodies of theoretical and empirical work that
inform environmental policies with respect to hazard mitigation, emergency management, climate adaptation, and water conservation. The purposes of this chapter are: (a) to
provide an overview of the way science and policy communities conceptualize the environmental risk of individuals and communities; and (b) show how these ideas have influenced contemporary public policy, focusing on climate change and urban water conservation.

Some definitions are in order as we begin the process of reviewing the perceptual and cognitive aspects of the geographical study of hazards. A hazard is an extreme natural event that disrupts the normal functioning of society in a significant way (Ramesh et al. 2007).

Society has built up all sorts of mechanisms to cope with extreme natural events, including infrastructure, construction technology, insurance programs, building codes, zoning, and warning systems. Hazards exceed our capacity to cope and, by definition, disrupt the
normal functioning of society and economy. Sudden onset hazards appear rapidly, and last for a period ranging from hours to weeks. They include floods, earthquakes, tornados, and wildfires. Chronic hazards are slow in onset and are barely noticeable to society; they include drought, sea-level rise, and weather events that may or may not be associated with climate change. They affect populations slowly, and become disasters only after they exceed a tipping point. (Cutter et al. 2009). The distinction between sudden onset and chronic hazards is significant in terms of perception and policy because the public at large and policy makers can anticipate floods such as those that occurred in the western USA from the 2016 “Godzilla” El Niño event and reduce their impacts on people and places. With chronic hazards such as climate change and drought, it is harder to interpret ongoing extreme events and distinguish them from longer-term, structural changes in society, economy, and environment. Causal mechanisms are less clear, and it is hard to distinguish between annual variations in temperature and precipitation and structural changes in climate and society.

Both sudden onset and chronic hazards can affect storm patterns and sea-level rise in a world where half the population now lives within 60 miles of the sea and three-quarters of all large cities are located along the coast (United Nations Environmental Programme 2012).

All rights reserved. May not be reproduced in any form without permission from the publisher, except fair uses permitted under U.S. or applicable copyright law.

Environmental risks and hazards 323
Vulnerability is the diminished capacity to cope with extreme natural events. Vulnerability stems from: (a) physical exposure and the degree to which people are harmed from natural events; (b) social conditions, emphasizing demographic and socio-economic factors such as age, poverty, and inequality that create associated sensitivities; and (c) adaptive capacity to respond to disasters. Adaptive capacity takes the form of community engagement, strong public institutions, social memory, and social learning to translate past experiences into societal action to reduce environmental risk (Adger et al. 2005; Polsky et al. 2007).

Resilience is the opposite of vulnerability. It involves “the extent to which a system can absorb recurrent perturbations and continue to regenerate without slowly degrading
or even unexpectedly flipping into less desirable states” (Folke et al. 2005: 442–443).

Resilience emphasizes the human and social capacity to process environmental risk
and respond to it. The ability to deal with the uncertainty of climate, for instance, is a fundamental characteristic of resilient communities (Huitema and Meijerink 2010; Stein et al. 2013).

18.2. ENVIRONMENTAL HAZARDS AND SUSTAINABILITY
Despite Gilbert White’s early work on interactions between nature and society in causing environmental risk, much of the early research on natural hazards in the 1950s, 1960s, and 1970s focused on the physical processes associated with flooding, droughts, hurricanes, tornados, volcanic eruptions, wildfires, heat stress, infectious diseases, and other extreme events. Scientists characterized the biological and geophysical aspects of hazards and their spatial distributions, the probability of events and return periods, and emergency management procedures and recovery strategies. Even today, media coverage of disasters often emphasizes the natural event itself at the expense of the human processes that put people and their property at risk of harm.

Early social science research emphasized the way individuals and society perceive and process environmental risk (Burton et al. 1978; Fischhoff et al. 1978; Slovic 1987). Political ecologists criticized the fixation on the physical aspects of hazards during the 1970s and 1980s. They argued that it is the political economy, not the biophysical event itself, which puts people in risky situations. (Blaikie et al. 1977; Wisner et al. 1977, 1994). Disasters are thus a complex mix of natural processes and human actions. Political economy theorists also emphasized the fact that the costs of hazards are unequally distributed, and that the unequal distribution of wealth reinforces existing power relations in society. In a seminal paper entitled “Taking the naturalness out of natural disasters,” O’Keefe et al. (1976) noted that rising worldwide vulnerability to hazards and disasters was due not to a change in climatological or biophysical events but to growing social and economic inequality that put people in unsafe places, limited societal support for them, and undermined
their ability to cope. This conceptual framework shifted the point of focus from natural hazards to societal inequality and argued that less developed countries are marginalized by the West’s development patterns in an increasingly interdependent world (Zimmerer
and Bassett 2003; Forsyth 2004; Peet and Watts 2004). In a reprise to the original call to arms from O’Keefe et al. (1976), Gaillard et al. (2014) chastised today’s climate adaptation efforts for paying too much attention to the climate at the expense of the root causes of vulnerability. The focus on climate leads to investments in so-called “Big A” Adaptation EBSCOhost - printed on 2/8/2023 3:02 AM via NATIONAL TAIWAN UNIVERSITY. All use subject to https://www.ebsco.com/terms-of-use MONTELLO 9781784717537 PRINT (4col).indd 323
13/03/2018 15:22
324 Handbook of behavioral and cognitive geography
efforts such as mega-scale infrastructure projects (dams, reservoirs, biofuel projects, and urban drainage) at the expense of “Little A” Adaptation investments in local resource managers such as fishermen, farmers, pastoralists, local craftsmen, and small business owners who are feeling the impacts of climate change.

More recently, in part because of the rise of sustainability science and its inherent interest in the concepts of vulnerability, resilience, and system dynamics, the hazards field has shifted back to Gilbert White’s initial focus on the interactions between society and nature in exposing people to loss of life and harm to property. Wisner et al.’s (1994) Pressure and Release Model of Vulnerability conceptualizes disasters as stemming from both biophysical and human processes. The idea of release occurs when a natural event (either sudden or chronic) interacts with increasing human vulnerability. The progression of vulnerability begins with root causes (e.g. power relations, economic systems, political systems). Dynamic pressures (e.g. population growth, increasing urbanization, neo-liberal conditions that reduce the role of government, market forces, deforestation) translate conditions created by the root causes into unsafe conditions (e.g. people forced to live on hillslopes, floodplains, and coastal zones; unable to afford insurance; living under the jurisdiction of governments that reduce their role in hazard mitigation and emergency management). Disaster occurs when this causal chain of root causes interacts with natural hazards, dynamic pressures, and unsafe conditions.

Sustainability scientists emphasize the capacity for complex and dynamic human-
natural coupled systems to adapt to interacting human and environmental processes. One key aspect of sustainability is the ability to experience hazards and maintain steady-state conditions. Turner et al. (2003) identified key aspects of vulnerability from a sustainability perspective. They include:
(a) the presence of multiple, interacting stressors;
(b) system dynamics--how the entire system experiences hazards;
(c) sensitivity to exposure;
(d) capacity to cope, i.e. resilience;
(e) ability to regroup and adapt to change;
(f) the fact that people experience hazard in local places, but those places are affected by larger global and national processes; and
(g) awareness that environmental risk is non-linear in nature, triggering critical thresholds. These non-linear properties are often key to understanding how societies
approach important thresholds with little warning or limited past experience.

18.3. ENVIRONMENTAL RISK PERCEPTIONS AND
BEHAVIORS
People make decisions on an everyday basis about how to manage environmental risk.

They buy flood insurance (or not), put flood-prone homes on stilts or surround them
with berms, and buy new homes in flood plains, coastal zones, or at the urban–wildlands interface. It helps to understand what behavioral scientists have learned over the past 50
years about how people understand environmental risk and make risk-based decisions.

An early, seminal idea in behavioral economics offers insight into why people do not
EBSCOhost - printed on 2/8/2023 3:02 AM via NATIONAL TAIWAN UNIVERSITY. All use subject to https://www.ebsco.com/terms-of-use MONTELLO 9781784717537 PRINT (4col).indd 324
13/03/2018 15:22
Environmental risks and hazards 325
always behave like “economic men” using utility theory to make environmental decisions.

In 1979, Nobel Laureates Daniel Kahneman and Amos Tversky put forth a set of ideas
called “Prospect Theory” to understand how individuals weigh alternative prospects
and make decisions in the face of risk. They described how people choose between
probabilistic alternatives (Kahneman and Tversky 1979). In an extensive set of behav-
ioral experiments, they proved that problem frames affect how people make risk-based
decisions. People are risk averse when they are in situations of perceived gain (trying to improve what they already have) and risk taking when they have something to lose (e.g.

trying to avoid disaster or catastrophe). They exhibit a general tendency for risk-seeking behaviors when confronted with negatively framed problems but risk-averse behaviors
when presented with positively framed problems (Gonzalez et al. 2005).

Prospect Theory helps to explain why decisions are often not rational choices based
on probability theory but a reaction to different problem frames and a process by which different personal goals are achieved. In hazards and disaster management, framing can affect how decision makers view the problem and hence evaluate environmental risk. An example is the use of NIMBY (not in my backyard) to frame discussion about the siting of nuclear power plants and hazardous waste sites. The negative connotation of NIMBY
is now widely used to frame decisions around any unwanted land use, including shopping malls, homeless shelters, and even parks. It triggers thoughts of negative community
reaction, and leads decision makers to take aggressive action to avoid risk (Asgary and Levi 2009).

Marx et al. (2007) differentiated between the analytical and sensory components
of decision making for the processing of climate hazard information. Analytical
processing uses logical rules, deliberative methods, and statistical information about probabilities of particular outcomes. It relies heavily on formal analytical brain
functions. Experiential processing relies on the decision maker’s past experiences
and his/her memories of the event and feelings about it. Decision making under risk
(known probabilities) and uncertainty (unknown probabilities) relies on both of these.

Psychologists seek to understand how the two processing systems interact to affect risk management and decision making. In fact, the two systems of analytical and experiential processing work together to help people evaluate environmental risk. Analytical processing affects how people formally assess their current situations relative to their experience. Experiential information helps them to remember how they felt in similar
past situations. They use analytical processing to make logical plans for the future, and experiential information to integrate their experiences and feelings into the decision process. Empirical experiments investigated how people combine statistical and
experiential information and find that experiential information overwhelms statistical information, unless statistical information connects in some ways to their personal
experiences (Marx et al. 2007).

Evidence-based decision making in the context of climate change assumes that the
past is a reliable guide to the future. Environmental scientists increasingly questioned the assumption that historical records are useful guide to future conditions. Milly et al. (2008) argued that changes in climate have inexorably altered annual streamflow and peak runoff, and human activity has altered land use and management conditions. They declared that stationarity is dead. Non-stationarity means that the analytical system used in the past for water resource development may no longer be a useful guide to future planning. In EBSCOhost - printed on 2/8/2023 3:02 AM via NATIONAL TAIWAN UNIVERSITY. All use subject to https://www.ebsco.com/terms-of-use MONTELLO 9781784717537 PRINT (4col).indd 325
13/03/2018 15:22
326 Handbook of behavioral and cognitive geography
China, for example, construction of the Three Gorges Dam has fundamentally altered the environmental risks of the downstream environment. Construction of the dam increased
the risk of landslides and reservoir-related earthquakes, reduced biodiversity, and led to more-than-expected relocation of long-time residents (Wines 2011).

18.3.1. Heuristics
People often use heuristics to make decisions when risk information cannot be processed analytically. Heuristics are simple, efficient rules that people use to form judgements. They are shortcuts to evaluate situations and make decisions. For the most part, heuristics cut down on processing time. Their use can have advantages and disadvantages for environmental decision making.

Marx et al. (2007) identified three heuristics (affect, availability, and recency) in making decisions in the face of environmental risk. They help to understand the mental shortcuts that people use to make decisions. Affect involves unconscious emotions and feelings. Affective decisions are quick and automatic reactions to feelings. Negative feelings associated with climate change are stronger predictors of public attitudes and policy preferences than demographic and socio-economic characteristics (Leiserowitz
2006). In a review of the factors that shape public attitudes and behaviors with respect to climate change, Patchen (2006) found that people were more willing to act when they were emotionally aroused and feeling fear and anger at the dangers of environmental
threats. Thus, messages about the consequences of climate change are likely to be more impactful on attitudes and behaviors when they incorporate what it means for people’s lives as farmers, hunters, anglers, gardeners, hikers, and nature lovers rather than in the analytical language of climate science.

The availability heuristic incorporates the idea that people solve problems based on
what they remember and how easily their memories can be retrieved. Natural hazards
scholars have long recognized the importance of memory in assessing the dangers of
floodplain development. The levee effect incorporates the idea that investment in flood mitigation infrastructure reduces the short-term perception of risk but increases long-term vulnerability to high-impact events (Kates et al. 2006; Burton and Cutter 2008; Montz and Tobin 2008). Investment in infrastructure often makes people feel safer, memories of past events fade, and more intense economic development takes place close to the river.

The long-term impact of levee construction is to reduce damage from low-impact events but increase harm from low-probability, high-intensity events such as Hurricane Katrina, which had a catastrophic impact on New Orleans and the Gulf Coast Region (Colton
2009). Di Baldassarre et al. (2013) recently conceptualized floodplain management as the interplay between biophysical processes and social memory. This view accounts for the fact that communities often avoid hazardous areas when their memories are fresh but
return to them with the passing of time.

The third relevant and related heuristic is “recency,” the tendency for people to over-weigh the experience of very rare events that have occurred in the recent past. Emphasis on recent experience may in fact be more indicative of future risk from climate change than long-term climate records because of Milly et al.’s (2008) point about the problem of decision making in a non-stationary climate.

EBSCOhost - printed on 2/8/2023 3:02 AM via NATIONAL TAIWAN UNIVERSITY. All use subject to https://www.ebsco.com/terms-of-use MONTELLO 9781784717537 PRINT (4col).indd 326
13/03/2018 15:22
Environmental risks and hazards 327
18.4. SOCIAL AMPLIFICATION OF RISK FRAMEWORK
Decisions about how to manage hazard risk are a matter of both individual and
societal perceptions and decisions. Individuals make decisions about whether to buy
insurance, evacuate dangerous areas, and respond to disasters. Society decides to offer insurance programs, build infrastructure, establish and enforce building codes, and
implement effective emergency management systems. The Social Amplification of Risk
Framework, first articulated by Kasperson et al. (1988), explained why certain events trigger public concern and societal action, while others do not. Risk stems from an
experience of potential harm, as reflected in the way people and institutions process threat. Public perceptions of risk stem from psychological biases, economic interests, and cultural values. The media has a critical role to play, as they communicate the ele-ments of hazardous events to a majority of people. People respond to these messages
through a variety of mechanisms that can either intensify or attenuate the perception of technical risk, as defined by experts. These perceptions then interact with social, institutional, and cultural processes in ways that amplify or attenuate the public
response (Kasperson and Kasperson 1996). Amplification thus occurs at two stages: in
the transfer of information about the risk and in the response mechanisms of society.

Johnson et al. (2005) noted that the policy response to flood crisis varied markedly in England and Wales, and they used a case study approach of four national-scale flooding events in 1947, 1953, 1998, and 2000 to understand why some catalytic events like floods translate into hazard-mitigation policy, while others do not. Their conceptual framework relied heavily on the policy science literature and envisioned policy formula-tion as a process of incremental change punctuated by dramatic events, such as floods, when public attention focuses on flood hazard and a window of opportunity opens
to allow policy to change. The window is navigated by a class of people called “policy entrepreneurs.” It does not stay open for long, and success in changing policy is largely a function of the effectiveness of the policy entrepreneurs to translate public attention into collective action.

18.5. CASE STUDIES
Ideas about environmental risk help to frame and interpret a range of environmental
problems and their respective policy contexts. Climate change policy in the USA and
worldwide can be explained, in large part, by public attitudes about environmental change and its causes, the veracity of scientific information, and the social contexts in which they are processed and translated into public policy. Efforts to reduce urban water use, especially outdoor use, incorporate individual behaviors, societal expectations, technology, and conservation policy. This section will use these two case studies to explore the way attitudes and behaviors reduce or exacerbate vulnerability to environmental change.

18.5.1. Climate Change Perceptions
The profound disconnection between climate science and policy has led social scientists to explore public perceptions of climate change. Results of these studies reveal an
EBSCOhost - printed on 2/8/2023 3:02 AM via NATIONAL TAIWAN UNIVERSITY. All use subject to https://www.ebsco.com/terms-of-use MONTELLO 9781784717537 PRINT (4col).indd 327
13/03/2018 15:22
328 Handbook of behavioral and cognitive geography
extraordinary wide range of climate change perceptions worldwide. In 2009, the World
Bank queried the residents of 15 countries about the seriousness of climate change, its priority relative to other problems, and its impact on people’s lives. Results showed a divide between poor countries lacking capacity to adapt and affluent countries whose
residents are less worried about the seriousness, consequences, and timing of climate change. Only 31% of Americans, 38% of Japanese, 43% of French, and 30% of Russians
saw climate change as a very serious problem. Climate change was also of relatively little concern in China, where only 28% saw it as a very serious problem. In contrast, climate change was a very serious problem for 90% of respondents in Mexico, 85% in Bangladesh, 75% in Kenya, and 61% in Indonesia. In nine of 15 countries, a majority thought that
climate change is already doing harm to people in their countries, but in six countries, including Russia and the USA, only a minority thought climate change is having an effect now. Majorities in all countries thought that there would be widespread adverse effects if climate change impacts were unchecked (World Bank 2009).

These differences in public attitudes also pertain within the USA. In Global Warming’s Six Americas, Roser-Renouf et al. (2014) showed that attitudes about climate change differed significantly across six demographic, cultural, and political groups. There are in fact six separate audiences within the American public, and each views science and policy information and forms opinions about climate change in its own way. The survey asked
Americans about climate change, information sources, risk perceptions, motivations,
values, behaviors, and policy preferences. The Six Americas vary on these dimensions, and they exhibit vastly different levels of engagement. The “Alarmed” are convinced
that climate change is a reality. They are fully engaged in doing something about it on a personal level and favor political action. The “Concerned” believe that climate change is happening, but they are not yet personally involved in the issue. The “Cautious,”
“Disengaged,” and “Doubtful” represent different stages of awareness and engagement,
but are not actively involved at this time. Active opposition to climate action comes primarily from “Dismissives” (who represent 10% of respondents). They are convinced
that climate change is not happening and are actively involved as opponents. They are quite sure about their views, unlikely to change their minds, and believe there is substan-tive disagreement in the scientific community about the science of climate change. They are convinced that global warming will not affect them personally, will not harm future generations, and is not a problem for the USA.

In-depth and repeated public opinion studies have monitored and compared Canada
and the US in their climate change attitudes (Borick et al. 2011). There is stronger belief in the existence of climate change in Canada than in the United States, but there are parts of Canada (e.g. the western provinces of Alberta and Saskatchewan) that are as skeptical about climate change as anywhere in the USA. Canadians are more likely to see climate change as a serious problem, and more are willing to pay higher taxes to achieve low
carbon goals. There is far less skepticism about the scientific facts and interpretations in Canada than in the USA.