Society has built up all sorts of mechanisms to cope with extreme natural events, including infrastructure, construction technology, insurance programs, building codes, zoning, and warning systems. Hazards exceed our capacity to cope and, by definition, disrupt the normal functioning of society and economy. Sudden onset hazards appear rapidly, and last for a period ranging from hours to weeks. They include floods, earthquakes, tornados, and wildfires. Chronic hazards are slow in onset and are barely noticeable to society; they include drought, sea-level rise, and weather events that may or may not be associated with climate change. They affect populations slowly, and become disasters only after they exceed a tipping point.The distinction between sudden onset and chronic hazards is significant in terms of perception and policy because the public at large and policy makers can anticipate floods such as those that occurred in the western USA from the 2016 “Godzilla” El Niño event and reduce their impacts on people and places. With chronic hazards such as climate change and drought, it is harder to interpret ongoing extreme events and distinguish them from longer-term, structural changes in society, economy, and environment. Causal mechanisms are less clear, and it is hard to distinguish between annual variations in temperature and precipitation and structural changes in climate and society.
Decisions about how to manage hazard risk are a matter of both individual and
societal perceptions and decisions. Individuals make decisions about whether to buy insurance, evacuate dangerous areas, and respond to disasters. Society decides to offer insurance programs, build infrastructure, establish and enforce building codes, and implement effective emergency management systems. The Social Amplification of Risk Framework, first articulated by Kasperson et al.explained why certain events trigger public concern and societal action, while others do not. Risk stems from an experience of potential harm, as reflected in the way people and institutions process threat. Public perceptions of risk stem from psychological biases, economic interests, and cultural values. The media has a critical role to play, as they communicate the ele-ments of hazardous events to a majority of people. People respond to these messages through a variety of mechanisms that can either intensify or attenuate the perception of technical risk, as defined by experts. These perceptions then interact with social, institutional, and cultural processes in ways that amplify or attenuate the public response. Amplification thus occurs at two stages: in the transfer of information about the risk and in the response mechanisms of society.